.TH NNACCT 1m "Release 6.6"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
nnacct \- news accounting and access authorization (nn)
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBnnacct\fP \-\fBr\fP [ \-\fBf\fP file ] [ \-\fBa\fP ] [ user ]...
.br
\fBnnacct\fP [ \-\fBp\fP\fIpolicy\fP ] [ \-\fBq\fP\fIquota\fP ] user...
.br
\fBnnacct\fP \-\fBZERO\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fInnacct\fP command provides an optional accounting and access
authorization for news reading via the \fInn\fP news reader.
.LP
The first form (\-\fBr\fP) is used to print accounting reports.
If a \fIfile\fP is specified data from a saved accounting file;
otherwise the data is read from the current accounting file.
.LP
If \-\fBa\fP is specified, the report will contain accounting data for
\fIall\fP users.  Otherwise, if one or more \fIusers\fP are specified,
the data for these users will be printed.  If neiter is specified,
only the accounting data for the current user is printed.
  Only the super-user can generate reports for other users than the
caller.
.LP
The second form (\-\fBp\fP and/or \-\fBq\fP) assigns the specified
access \fIpolicy\fP and/or \fIquota\fP to the specified users.  If a
given user is not already known in the accounting file, a new entry
with the specified policy and quota is created (default values are
used if both are not specified).
.LP
The third form (\-\fBZERO\fP) will clear the usage counts for
\fIall\fP users.
Individual usage counts cannot be cleared.
The original accounting file is saved with a .old suffix.
.LP
The following policies are currently implemented:
.TP
\fB0\fP
No access.  The user is not allowed to read news at all.
.TP
\fB1\fP
Privileged user.  The user can read news at all times and no
accounting information is saved.  This is obviously the policy for
system administrators :-)
.TP
\fB2\fP
Full time access.  The user can access news at all times.
.TP
\fB3\fP
Off-hours access.  The user can only access news at off hours, i.e. in
the morning, in the evening, on week-ends, and on holidays (not
complete \- check the source :-)
.LP
The \fIquota\fP specifies a number of \fIhours\fP which the user is
allowed to read news.  When this quota is used up, access will be
blocked.  A quota of zero gives unlimited access.
.LP
New users will get the \fIdefault policy\fP and \fIquota\fP defined in
account.c.  If this allows new users to read news at only specific
times, this form can be used to permit individual users to read news
at all times, or it can be used to prevent them from reading news at
all.  If the default policy does not allow new users to read news,
this form must be used to authorize them to read news.
.SH HOW IT WORKS
If authorization is enabled, the \fInn\fP news reader will call
\fInnacct\fP on start-up to check whether the policy and quota defined
for the current user allows him to read news at this time (or at all).
.LP
If accounting is enabled, the \fInn\fP news reader will call
\fInnacct\fP on exit to register the time spent on news reading.
If account logging is also defined (see account.c), an line is also
added to the accounting log file.
.LP
When accounting is defined, the user can use the \fB:cost\fP command
to get the current accounting data, and if the variable
\fBreport-cost\fP is set, \fInn\fP will print accounting information
on exit.
.SH CONTIGURATION AND NEW POLICIES
The use of \fInnacct\fP is enabled via the ACCOUNTING and
AUTHORIZE symbols in \fInn\fP's configuration file.  Further
configuration of cost calculations, logging, default policy, default
quotas, etc. is done directly in the source file \fIaccount.c\fP.  New
access policies can also be defined in this file.  This allows you to
change the policies or prices without having to recompile the whole
package since only \fInnacct\fP is modified.
.SH PRIVILEGED USERS
Normally, only root is allowed to change user policy or quota, list
all user's accounting data etc.  This privilege can be shared with
other users by listing their login name in the file $CLIENT/admins.
There should be exactly one login name per line, and no blanks are
allowed.
.SH FILES
.DT
.ta \w'$db/acctlog'u+3m
.\"ta 0 16
$db/acct	accounting data (accumulated per user)
.br
$db/acctlog	accounting log (grows indefinitely)
.br
$lib/admins	login names of privileged \fInnacct\fP users.
.DT
.SH SEE ALSO
nn(1), nnusage(1)
.SH BUGS
There should be some tools to mess around with the accounting files,
e.g. to make summaries, clear usage counters, etc.
.SH AUTHOR
Kim F. Storm, Texas Instruments A/S, Denmark
.br
E-mail: storm@texas.dk
