.TH NNCHECK 1 "Release 6.6"
.\" (c) Copyright 1988, 1990, Kim F. Storm.  All rights reserved.
.UC 4
.SH NAME
nncheck \- check for unread articles
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nncheck
[ -Q -r -t ]  [ -f format ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I nncheck
will report if there are some articles on the system which you have not read.
.LP
Without options, \fInncheck\fP will simply print a message reporting
the number of unread articles with the following format:
.br
	There are 327 unread articles in 25 groups
.br
and when there are no unread articles, the following message will be
printed:
.br
	No News (is good news)
.LP
\fInncheck\fP will exit with a value of 0 if there are unread
articles, and 99 if there is no news (see the exception for the \-r
option.)
.LP
It is important to notice that even though unread articles have been
reported by \fInncheck\fP, the actual number of unread articles may be
much lower (or even zero) when \fInn\fP is invoked to read
the articles.  This is because the calculation of the number of unread
articles is only based on recorded article number intervals.  Invoking
\fInn\fP to read the articles may reveal that the articles have
previously been read in another news group, have been expired, or are
.I killed
using the
.I auto-kill
facility.
.LP
The following options are used to modify the amount and format of the
output from \fInncheck\fP:
.TP
.B \-Q
Quiet operation.  No output is produced, only the exit status indicate
whether there is unread news.
.TP
.B \-t
Print the name of each group with unread articles, and how many unread
articles there are (not counting split digests!).
.TP
.B \-r
Output a single integer value specifying the number of unread
articles, and exit with a 0 status (somebody told me this would be
useful).
.TP
\&\-\fBf\fP \fIformat\fP
Output the number of unread articles using the specified format.  The
format is a text that may contain the following %-escapes:
.sp 0.5v
.DT
.ta 1i 2i
.\"ta 1 10 20
.nf
	\fB%-code\fP	\fBresulting output\fP
.sp 0.5v
	%u	"\fIuuu\fP unread articles"
	%g	"\fIggg\fP groups"
	%i	"is" if 1 unread article, else "are"
	%U	"\fIuuu\fP"
	%G	"\fIggg\fP"
.fi
.DT
.sp 0.5v
where
.I uuu
is the number of unread articles, and
.I ggg
is the number of groups with unread articles.
.sp 0.5v
For example, the default output format is
.br
	"There %i %u in %g"
.br
which I prefer to the following less perfect format:
.br
	"There are %U unread article(s) in %G group(s)"
.LP
.SH FILES
.DT
.ta \w'$db/MASTER'u+6m
.\"ta 0 12
~/.newsrc	The record of read articles
.br
$db/MASTER	The database master index
.DT
.SH SEE ALSO
nn(1), nngoback(1), nngrab(1), nngrep(1), nnpost(1), nntidy(1)
.br
nnadmin(1M), nnusage(1M), nnmaster(1M)
.SH AUTHOR
Kim F. Storm, Texas Instruments A/S, Denmark
.br
E-mail: storm@texas.dk
