.TH NNGREP 1 "Release 6.6"
.\" (c) Copyright 1988, 1990, Kim F. Storm.  All rights reserved.
.UC 4
.SH NAME
nngrep \- grep for news group names (nn)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nngrep
[ \-\fBainprsu\fP ]
[ \-\fBl\fP ]
[ \fIpattern\fP ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fInngrep\fP can print various selections of the available news
groups.
.LP
Without options, \fInngrep\fP will list all currently \fIsubscribed\fP
newsgroups whose name matches any of the specified \fIpatterns\fP.  If
no pattern is specified, all subscribed groups will be listed.
.LP
The selection of news groups against which the patterns are matches,
and subsequently printed by \fInngrep\fP can be limited or
expanded using the following command line options and arguments:
.TP
\fB\-a\fP
Use \fIboth\fP subscribed and unsubscribed groups.  Overrides the
\fB\-u\fP option.
.TP
\fB\-i\fP
Use only \fIignored\fP groups, i.e. which are \fInot\fP in the
presentation sequence.
.TP
\fB\-n\fP
Use only \fInew\fP groups.  Notice that \fInn\fP considers a group to
be new until you have read at least one article in the group, or you
have unsubscribed to the group.  This means that even reasonable
active news groups may remain "new" for quite some time if it only
contains articles which are cross-posted to other groups which occur
earlier in your presentation sequence.
.TP
\fB\-p\fP
Use only groups with \fIunread\fP (pending) articles.
.TP
\fB\-r\fP
Use only \fIread\fP groups, i.e. without unread articles.
.TP
\fB\-s\fP
Use only groups which are in the presentation \fIsequence\fP.
.TP
\fB\-u\fP
Use only \fIunsubscribed\fP groups.
.LP
These options can be combined if they don't logically exclude each
other.
.LP
For example, to get the names of all "source" groups, you can use the
command
.br
	nngrep source
.LP
You can use this to read a specific subset of news groups with
\fInn\fP; for example
.br
	nn `nngrep -sp source`
.SH LONG LISTING
A \fIlong\fP listing of the matched groups can be requested with the
\fB\-l\fP option.  It will include the following information:
.LP
.DT
.ta \w'SEQUENCE'u+3m
.\"ta 0 12
SUBSCR	Specifies whether the group is subscribed or not (yes/no).
.br
NEW	Specifies whether the group is new or not (yes/no).
.br
UNREAD	Shows the number of unread articles in the group (if any).
.br
SEQUENCE	Shows the group's index in the presentation sequence.
.br
GROUP	The name of the group.
.br
.DT
.SH FILES
.DT
.ta \w'~/.nn/init'u+3m
.\"ta 0 12
~/.newsrc	The record of read articles
.br
~/.nn/init	The presentation sequence
.DT
.SH SEE ALSO
nn(1), nncheck(1), nngoback(1), nngrab(1), nnpost(1), nntidy(1)
.br
nnadmin(1M), nnusage(1M), nnmaster(8)
.SH AUTHOR
Kim F. Storm, Texas Instruments A/S, Denmark
.br
E-mail: storm@texas.dk

