.TH NNPOST 1 "Release 6.6"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
nnpost \- post news articles (\fInn\fP)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nnpost
[ \-\fBdksy\fP \fIstring\fP ]
[ \-\fBf\fP \fIfile\fP ]
[ \-\fBp\fP ]
[ \fIgroup\fP... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nnpost
is used to post new articles using \fInn\fP's normal interface, but
without entering \fInn\fP in reading mode.
.LP
When started, it reads the \fIinit\fP file and then directly executes
\fInn\fP's \fB:post\fP command.
.LP
It will prompt for a (comma-separated) list of news groups, the
article subject, a list of keywords, a summary, and the distribution
of the article.  Each of these prompts can also be supplied via
command line options or arguments as described below.
.LP
When prompted for the "Newsgroup:", entering a \fB?\fP as the first
key will cause \fInnpost\fP to list all the known news groups and
their purpose (if this information is available).  You can also enter
\fB/\fP followed by a word or regular expression which will cause
\fInnpost\fP to produce a (much) shorter listing only containing the
groups whose name and/or purpose description matches the regular
expression.  When paging through either list, you can enter \fBq\fP to
quit the listing.
.LP
If a source file is specified with \fB\-f\fP it will be used as the
initial article body.  If the \fB\-p\fP option is also specified, the
article is posted directly without editing.
.LP
\fInnpost\fP can be used to do unattended postings if sufficient
arguments are provided on the command line to build the header and the
body of the article.  The required arguments are: one or more
newsgroups, a subject (\fB\-s\fP), a source file (\fB\-f\fP), a
distribution (\fB\-d\fP), and the \fB\-p\fP option.  Other fields
which are not specified (e.g. keywords) will not be included in the
header.  The contents of the \fInews-header\fP variable in the
init file will be included in the header.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-d\fP \fIdistribution\fP
Use the specified \fIdistribution\fP for the article.
.TP
\fB\-k\fP "\fIkeywords\fP"
Associate the specified \fIkeywords\fP with the article.
.sp 0.5v
.TP
\fB\-s\fP "\fIsubject\fP"
Use the specified \fIsubject\fP for the new article.
.TP
\fB\-y\fP "\fIsummary\fP"
Include the given \fIsummary\fP in the article header.
.TP
\fB\-f\fP \fIfile\fP
Read the article \fIbody\fP from the specified file.
.TP
\fB\-p\fP
Post the article specified with \fB\-f\fP without editing.
.SH FILES
.DT
.ta \w'~/.nn/init'u+3m
.\"ta 0 12
~/.nn/init	The control variables for \fInnpost\fP.
.DT
.SH SEE ALSO
nn(1)
.SH AUTHOR
Kim F. Storm, Texas Instruments A/S, Denmark
.br
E-mail: storm@texas.dk

