.TH NNSTATS 1M "Release 6.6"
.\" (c) Copyright 1988, 1990, Kim F. Storm.  All rights reserved.
.UC 4
.SH NAME
nnstats \- display \fInnmaster\fP collection and expire statistics
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nnstats
[ \-\fBlt\fP ]
[ \-\fBd\fP \fImonth\fP \fIday\fP ]
[ \-\fBm\fP \fImonth\fP ]
[ \fIlogfile\fP ]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I nnstats
will extract the collection (C) and expiration (X) entries from the
log file and calculate total and average number of articles, groups
and elapsed time per day, per month, or for the duration of the whole
log file.
.LP
Normally only a summary for the specified period is printed.  If
\-\fBl\fP is specified, the statistics for each day in the period is
also printed, and if \-\fBt\fP is specified the summary is not
printed.
.LP
Normally the statistics is collected for all days in the log files (or
the current log file if one is not specified).
.LP
If "\-\fBm\fP \fImonth\fP" is specified, the statistics for that month
is calculated.  The \fImonth\fP is specified in normal \fIdate\fP
notation, i.e. a capitalized three letter abbreviation like Jan, Feb, ...
.LP
If "\-\fBd\fP \fImonth\fP \fIday\fP" is specified, the statistics for
that date only is calculated and printed.
.SH FILES
.DT
.ta \w'.../Log'u+3m
.\"ta 0 20
.../Log	The log file
.DT
.SH SEE ALSO
nn(1), nnusage(1M), nnadmin(1M), nnmaster(8)
.SH NOTES
If \fInnmaster\fP is run with options \-\fBL\fPCX, \fInnstats\fP will
not work, because the necessary entries are not written to the log file.
.SH AUTHORS
Mark Moraes <moraes@csri.toronto.edu>
.br
Kim F. Storm <storm@texas.dk>


